[Music.]
[Tom Turbiville]: Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
[Tom Turbiville]: I'm Tom Turbiville.
[Tom Turbiville]: Gary Banta has lived in the Brazos Valley since 1982. He was born in Brownfield Texas, grew up in Kansas, and after high school and working for a time he joined the army in 1967.
That was well into the Vietnam War. That's where he both drove and rode shotgun on truck convoys delivering supplies to the hot spots where choppers and aircraft could not land. Yes it was a year tour that was quite dangerous but he survived it without any serious wounds.
[Tom Turbiville]: He will talk to us about his time in Vietnam, and then later his duty at Fort Knox, where he indeed saw the gold, and later as a chaplain's assistant in Germany.
[Tom Turbiville]: And he's here to talk proudly about the work of the American Legion, Earl Graham Post 159, of which he is now the commander.
[Tom Turbiville]: Please welcome Gary Banta to Veterans of the Valley.
[Tom Turbiville]: Gary, it is a pleasure to have you here, and thank you for your service, and especially to the American Legion, which we're going to talk about a lot here in a little bit.
[Tom Turbiville]: But let's talk about sort of you were born in Texas, you grew up in Kansas, and it wasn't long after high school, after working for a while, that you decided to join the Army.
[Tom Turbiville]: Sort of talk about that transition from boyhood into the Army.
[Gary Banta]: Well, I grew up in Coldwater, Kansas.
[Gary Banta]: And after high school, moved back to Texas and went to work on a road job at Lake Meredith, up close to Borger.
[Gary Banta]: And it was awfully cold.
[Gary Banta]: And the Vietnam War was on.
[Gary Banta]: And at that time, it had not become unpopular.
[Gary Banta]: So I felt like I wanted to go in the military.
[Gary Banta]: And so I joined and was sent to Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri for basic training and then on to other duties.
[Tom Turbiville]: Yeah, you told me, I guess you joined up in Amarillo and while most of the people were sent to Fort Bliss where it was warm, you couldn't get out of the cold, right?
[Gary Banta]: Yeah.
[Tom Turbiville]: You were sent to Missouri.
[Gary Banta]: I've been working in ice and cold up there in Amarillo and thought I'd try to go to Bliss to get basic and they sent me to Fort Leonard Wood.
[Tom Turbiville]: A heavy vehicle operator, that's what you were trained in, but you never really did that until you got to Vietnam.
[Tom Turbiville]: And let's go ahead and talk about that because we've got a lot to talk about today.
[Tom Turbiville]: April 1st, April Fool's Day of 1968 was the day that you went in country.
[Tom Turbiville]: Talk about your first tour of duty in Vietnam and being on a convoy and sort of what all that involved.
[Gary Banta]: Okay.
[Gary Banta]: I landed at Cam Ranh Bay.
[Gary Banta]: It was a reception center for incoming people coming to Vietnam.
[Gary Banta]: And there were a number of them, but that's where I went.
[Gary Banta]: And I stayed there for a day or two until I found out what unit I would be going to and then went to Da Nang.
[Gary Banta]: and was assigned for a short period of time with an ordinance company, and I wasn't there, but just a few weeks, and then on up across, up into the northern part of Vietnam, into I Corps, with the 1st Air Cavalry Division.
[Gary Banta]: 101st Airborne was there, 25th Armored Cavalry.
[Tom Turbiville]: This is in Phu Bae, northern part of Vietnam.
[Gary Banta]: That's right.
[Gary Banta]: Phu Bae is a southern suburb of Hue, Citadel City.
[Gary Banta]: And that battle had been going on and was just ending when I got there.
[Tom Turbiville]: Right.
[Tom Turbiville]: And for the rest of your duty, you ran convoys.
[Tom Turbiville]: That was your job.
[Tom Turbiville]: I want you to talk about that a little bit more specifically.
[Tom Turbiville]: Talk about what that involved.
[Tom Turbiville]: You drove some, but mostly you would ride a shotgun with an M60.
[Tom Turbiville]: M60.
[Tom Turbiville]: Talk about the need for convoys, talk about the effect of convoys, what it did, and this brought on some pretty dicey situations for you.
[Gary Banta]: Sure did, sure did.
[Gary Banta]: Convoys, the supply depot was at a place called Tan Mai.
[Gary Banta]: It was a deep water pier at the mouth of the Perfume River.
[Gary Banta]: The Perfume River runs through Hue, but at the mouth of that river is a deep water pier, and everything that came into Vietnam
[Gary Banta]: came in through that deepwater pier.
[Gary Banta]: All the supplies.
[Gary Banta]: All kinds of supplies.
[Gary Banta]: Every kind of thing you could imagine, all the way from bullets to biscuits.
[Gary Banta]: Whatever came in, came in there.
[Gary Banta]: And I would say the majority of the time, we were hauling just the everyday things of life, trying to provide even plywood and things like that.
[Gary Banta]: But during the times when it got really serious, we were hauling ammunition, powder, rockets,
[Gary Banta]: every kind of thing you can imagine in support of these fire bases.
[Gary Banta]: And that's where the bad part of my tours are.
[Gary Banta]: Not that that was all of it because we got mortared nearly every night or rockets or something every night, but those convoys where we would go out to that
[Gary Banta]: to Tan Mai and pick up those loads of ammunition or whatever we were taking inland.
[Gary Banta]: And those were usually night convoys, run at night.
[Gary Banta]: And I don't know if you know how that works, but there are no lights.
[Gary Banta]: All you have is on the rear of the vehicle in front of you are two triangles about the size of a dime.
[Gary Banta]: And when they light up red, that brakes are on when they're white, he's running.
[Gary Banta]: And that's all you've got to look at.
[Gary Banta]: And it's terrifying because
[Gary Banta]: In the middle of that, you're going to get shot at.
[Tom Turbiville]: Right.
[Gary Banta]: It's going to happen.
[Tom Turbiville]: And the thing that you most feared is being stopped.
[Gary Banta]: Stopped.
[Tom Turbiville]: Because the VC would stop you by any means necessary, whether it would be roadside mine or grenade launcher.
[Gary Banta]: That's right.
[Tom Turbiville]: Or whatever.
[Gary Banta]: RPGs.
[Tom Turbiville]: And that happened.
[Gary Banta]: It did.
[Gary Banta]: It did happen.
[Gary Banta]: And generally, you would dismount, take your M60 off the truck, and the driver and the gunner would get underneath the engine block of the truck.
[Gary Banta]: And we did that several times.
[Tom Turbiville]: Right.
[Gary Banta]: And prepared to defend the position.
[Tom Turbiville]: Yeah.
[Gary Banta]: You know, I guess probably not much different than what goes on.
[Gary Banta]: But we didn't see any IEDs.
[Tom Turbiville]: Right.
[Gary Banta]: There wasn't any of that.
[Gary Banta]: Now, these were five and a half ton trucks, right?
[Gary Banta]: Five ton trucks.
[Gary Banta]: And we had in the convoys, especially those that were loaded with ammunition, we would have a five ton truck that had inch plate steel on it.
[Tom Turbiville]: Mm-hmm.
[Gary Banta]: And in the back of that was a quad 50.
[Gary Banta]: That's four 50 caliber machine guns, electrically operated.
[Gary Banta]: There would be three of those in the convoy, then Jeeps that moved all through the convoy with two M60s on them.
[Gary Banta]: So we had a lot of firepower, but sometimes you needed it.
[Tom Turbiville]: Right.
[Tom Turbiville]: August of 1968, you talked about one operation called Massachusetts Stryker.
[Gary Banta]: That's right.
[Gary Banta]: That was probably the, there were several weeks there that I, you know, I don't even really remember.
[Gary Banta]: It was such a blur because it was 24 hours a day.
[Gary Banta]: We never stopped.
[Gary Banta]: I mean, you'd sleep where you could sleep.
[Gary Banta]: But we would run out to the deep water pier, pick up ammunition,
[Gary Banta]: and that was so dangerous carrying that powder because one tracer into a truckload of powder and that truck was gone.
[Gary Banta]: And it did happen.
[Gary Banta]: It just didn't happen to me.
[Gary Banta]: But during the Massachusetts Striker, the enemy in the A Shau Valley were making a resurgence.
[Gary Banta]: And this is after Khe Sanh and after the Tet Offensive in play, they were trying to recapture their stronghold in the A Shau Valley.
[Gary Banta]: The Massachusetts Striker was designed to beat them back.
[Gary Banta]: We hauled ammunition to these fire bases, Birmingham, Bastogne, and Geronimo.
[Gary Banta]: And oftentimes, they would fire the ammunition off the vehicles.
[Gary Banta]: I mean, they'd break the bands on 175, 155 howitzers and fire it right off the trucks.
[Gary Banta]: And it was pretty spectacular.
[Tom Turbiville]: Right.
[Tom Turbiville]: And when you had to fire your weapon, that would light up.
[Tom Turbiville]: They know where you are.
[Gary Banta]: You didn't want to pull the trigger on an M60 until you had to.
[Tom Turbiville]: Right.
[Gary Banta]: And once you did that, they definitely knew where you were.
[Gary Banta]: The difference is our tracers were red and theirs were green.
[Gary Banta]: So you knew when they were coming, you knew you were being shot at for sure.
[Tom Turbiville]: When you think about what you did and how often you ran these convoys and how you ran them and how often you did meet resistance, you were never wounded.
[Tom Turbiville]: You caught some shrapnel in the knee one time.
[Gary Banta]: Yeah, one time.
[Tom Turbiville]: And it was taken out just.
[Gary Banta]: A medic took it out.
[Tom Turbiville]: A medic took it out.
[Tom Turbiville]: Never reported, so no Purple Heart.
[Tom Turbiville]: But you have to feel very blessed and very fortunate that you came back with that wound.
[Gary Banta]: Yeah, I am.
[Gary Banta]: So many people didn't.
[Gary Banta]: I know many people that were hurt badly, and I know some that were killed.
[Gary Banta]: And there are some that were killed that I don't know that were killed.
[Gary Banta]: So it was a bad time.
[Tom Turbiville]: I want to talk about the nature of this convoy again.
[Tom Turbiville]: You were telling me the other day that you were talking about Route 1 and it runs the entire length of Vietnam.
[Gary Banta]: That's right.
[Gary Banta]: All the way from the Mekong Delta to the DMZ.
[Tom Turbiville]: And eventually you quit running sort of convoy style because that's when you would get stopped and you'd run the trucks one at a time.
[Gary Banta]: One at a time.
[Gary Banta]: And that would begin at Hue going north toward Dong Ha.
[Tom Turbiville]: Because the VC wouldn't waste their...
[Gary Banta]: They were less apt to try to stop one truck.
[Gary Banta]: They would shoot at you.
[Gary Banta]: I mean, you'd be driving on Route 1 and you'd see the machine gun bullets striking the rice paddy coming toward you.
[Gary Banta]: And then they'd pass in front of you or hit your truck.
[Gary Banta]: But you're just running wide open as fast as that truck would go.
[Tom Turbiville]: Yeah, that's what I wanted to talk about because sometimes these convoys would be up to 20 trucks.
[Tom Turbiville]: And it wouldn't be like a slow-moving convoy.
[Gary Banta]: No, we'd be flying.
[Tom Turbiville]: You wouldn't catch the one in front of you and the one behind you wouldn't catch you.
[Tom Turbiville]: You'd be flying to get from where you were to where you were going as fast as you could.
[Gary Banta]: As fast as you could roll it.
[Gary Banta]: And sometimes that meant having to deal with Vietnamese vehicles.
[Gary Banta]: They would have these buses loaded with ducks and geese and 300 people.
[Gary Banta]: And it was always very dicey because you didn't want them stopping you or slowing you down.
[Gary Banta]: And if they tried to slow you down or it appeared they were trying to slow you down, then it would make you think,
[Gary Banta]: you know, that they're trying to set me up and there's been more than one Lombro bus get pushed off road at 70 miles an hour.
[Gary Banta]: I hope nobody got hurt, but that's what they did.
[Gary Banta]: And that's what I did.
[Tom Turbiville]: And these weren't paved highways.
[Tom Turbiville]: These were dirt roads.
[Gary Banta]: No, but Route 1 was completely paved.
[Tom Turbiville]: Right.
[Gary Banta]: And if when you got off Route 1, then you began to worry about mines.
[Gary Banta]: Because on Route 1, they couldn't mine an asphalted road.
[Gary Banta]: And the areas when they would repair them in the mornings, engineers would run mine sweeps on that section while they were repairing the road.
[Gary Banta]: So you'd be safe on Route 1, as long as you're on that asphalt.
[Tom Turbiville]: So the A Shau Valley was pretty...
[Tom Turbiville]: It was pretty complete with mines.
[Tom Turbiville]: I mean, they were pretty much everywhere.
[Gary Banta]: Once you passed into the A Shau Valley, you were definitely in enemy territory.
[Tom Turbiville]: I asked you the other day, were you afraid?
[Tom Turbiville]: And tell me what your answer was.
[Tom Turbiville]: You said you were afraid, but you weren't terrified.
[Gary Banta]: I was afraid, but I was not terrified.
[Gary Banta]: I was young.
[Gary Banta]: And I guess I had confidence that I'd been trained well enough to do what I was supposed to do.
[Gary Banta]: I just was not terrified.
[Gary Banta]: I was afraid.
[Gary Banta]: I mean, when mortars are falling around you, a man would be a fool to say that he wasn't afraid.
[Tom Turbiville]: Yeah.
[Gary Banta]: But I wasn't terrified, nor was I ever not able to think clearly.
[Tom Turbiville]: Right.
[Tom Turbiville]: You talked about one time about going to get some bread and the convoy took off without you.
[Gary Banta]: Yeah.
[Tom Turbiville]: Tell us that story.
[Gary Banta]: That was foolish.
[Tom Turbiville]: Of them or you?
[Gary Banta]: Of me.
[Gary Banta]: It was a really crazy thing I did.
[Gary Banta]: Vietnamese had these little carts, and they made bread.
[Gary Banta]: And we were in Hue waiting at a night convoy.
[Gary Banta]: And, of course, I was hungry.
[Gary Banta]: I don't know if you've ever tried to live on sea rations, but if you could get any kind of food, real food.
[Gary Banta]: So I saw this bread thing up the street, and it was, I don't know, not more than a block.
[Gary Banta]: And I had a, Fritz was his name.
[Gary Banta]: He was a new guy in the country, and he was driving the truck.
[Gary Banta]: I said, Fritz, stay right here.
[Gary Banta]: I'm going to run up there and get some of that bread.
[Gary Banta]: And he said, oh, don't do that, Banta.
[Gary Banta]: And I said, yeah, I'm going to go.
[Gary Banta]: So I took off.
[Gary Banta]: Well, I didn't get started good, and I hear them take off.
[Gary Banta]: I hear the trucks taking off.
[Gary Banta]: So I ran to this fella and I got the bread and gave him some MPC, I don't know how much, whatever I gave him and ran back.
[Gary Banta]: Well, the time I got back, the trucks were going around the corner, oh, maybe two or three blocks down, going around the corner.
[Gary Banta]: Well, you don't just, and we had a heavy load, so you don't just start off, take off real fast.
[Gary Banta]: So in a little bit, we're flying.
[Gary Banta]: And it's dark and we can't see anything.
[Gary Banta]: And we're trying to look for these white triangles that'll be in front of us, right?
[Gary Banta]: Because there's no lights.
[Gary Banta]: We're flying this as fast as we can go.
[Gary Banta]: And we passed the Catholic church.
[Gary Banta]: I think you'll show a picture of that Catholic church.
[Gary Banta]: We passed that Catholic church.
[Gary Banta]: And just shortly after you passed that, there's a bridge.
[Gary Banta]: And the Vietnamese were protecting that bridge.
[Gary Banta]: If you didn't guard the bridges, they'd just blow them up.
[Gary Banta]: So they had...
[Gary Banta]: bunkers all around that bridge and they had just pulled all the Constatina wire back across the road and we came around that corner and there's all that Constatina wire and we hit it at about 70 miles an hour.
[Tom Turbiville]: Oh my goodness.
[Gary Banta]: Constantino wire, and it took me days to get all that wire out of the axles of that truck, but we didn't stop.
[Tom Turbiville]: You mentioned the picture, so let's go ahead and go to some photographs right now, as a matter of fact, because we've got some to look at from your collection.
[Tom Turbiville]: The first picture is going to be of you just very soon after.
[Tom Turbiville]: There it is right there.
[Tom Turbiville]: This is pretty soon after you arrived in country.
[Gary Banta]: Yeah, I hadn't been there more than maybe a week or 10 days at most.
[Gary Banta]: You see, I've got an M14.
[Gary Banta]: And it was pretty strange to get an M14, but that's what I was issued.
[Gary Banta]: But they shortly took those up and gave us M16s.
[Tom Turbiville]: This is an M60?
[Gary Banta]: Yeah, that's an M60.
[Gary Banta]: That's our perimeter at Phu Bai looking toward the South China Sea.
[Gary Banta]: I don't know why I took that picture, even if I did take that picture, but at nighttime, the direction that guns pointed was a fearful place because you didn't know what was out there.
[Tom Turbiville]: Okay.
[Tom Turbiville]: How about the rifle that you're holding?
[Gary Banta]: That's a Chinese Chi-Com bolt-action
[Gary Banta]: 7.62 by 51 millimeter rifle with a bayonet.
[Gary Banta]: It's not even a semi-automatic.
[Gary Banta]: I don't know where I found it.
[Gary Banta]: I have no idea, but I found it.
[Gary Banta]: I had plans to bring it home, but somebody got it or took it away from me or maybe they, I don't know what happened to it.
[Tom Turbiville]: But you got a picture of it.
[Gary Banta]: I got a picture of it.
[Tom Turbiville]: There you go.
[Tom Turbiville]: Talk about this picture.
[Tom Turbiville]: It's pretty fascinating.
[Gary Banta]: Well, you see a bridge there.
[Gary Banta]: That's at Anli.
[Gary Banta]: That's between Quang Tri and Hue.
[Gary Banta]: And they've blown up that bridge.
[Gary Banta]: The North Vietnamese blew it up.
[Gary Banta]: And so they're reconstructing it, the engineers are, and the Seabees.
[Gary Banta]: And so our convoys would go into the river and drive that river.
[Gary Banta]: And that's not as deep as it got.
[Gary Banta]: It would get up to where it would nearly be to the windows on those trucks.
[Gary Banta]: But the exhaust is up high enough that you could drive through there.
[Gary Banta]: And you always had a raft of kids
[Gary Banta]: around you.
[Gary Banta]: They would disappear from everywhere, just like they do in any war, I think.
[Gary Banta]: And we'd feed them, give them candy or whatever we could give them.
[Gary Banta]: I had a group in Hue that I took care of for my tour over there that always, when I got a chance to get them something special, I got it.
[Tom Turbiville]: Okay.
[Tom Turbiville]: This is a fantastic picture of a
[Gary Banta]: That's a fire base.
[Gary Banta]: That's a Marine fire base called GLA.
[Gary Banta]: And this is an outpost that I'm at up on top of this mountain.
[Gary Banta]: And I'm on guard duty because that's what I'm doing up there.
[Gary Banta]: I'm going up for guard duty and it's going to get night.
[Gary Banta]: And our job is to protect the men that are sleeping down there in those hooches that you see.
[Gary Banta]: My hooch was directly behind me down below.
[Gary Banta]: Like I say, I wasn't there, but just a short time. I kind of wish I could have stayed there because...
[Tom Turbiville]: So this photograph is pretty soon after you arrived in country.
[Gary Banta]: I hadn't been there very long.
[Tom Turbiville]: We're going to see a photograph towards the end of your tour here in a minute.
[Tom Turbiville]: But right here, I think we have a picture coming up.
[Tom Turbiville]: That's what the convoy looked like.
[Gary Banta]: I don't know what we've got there, but we're loaded down with something.
[Gary Banta]: And we're going somewhere, but I don't even know where that is.
[Gary Banta]: I just want people to see an idea of what we were talking about when we talked about the convoy with the five-ton trucks.
[Tom Turbiville]: And then I think, now there you are towards the end of your tour, and not a lot of meat on those bones.
[Tom Turbiville]: You're on the left.
[Gary Banta]: No, it took me a...
[Gary Banta]: It was hard on me.
[Gary Banta]: I lost a lot of weight.
[Gary Banta]: We didn't eat very much or very often, and what you got was sea rations.
[Gary Banta]: It wasn't a mess hall.
[Tom Turbiville]: And that's you and two other Texans, right?
[Gary Banta]: Yes, sir.
[Gary Banta]: That's Jerry Smith on the right, Greg Mahoney in the middle, and myself on the left.
[Gary Banta]: There was another guy.
[Gary Banta]: There were four of us Texans in the same hooch.
[Gary Banta]: His name was Goodrich, and he was from College Station, but he was killed there.
[Gary Banta]: And I don't know that I even have a picture of him.
[Tom Turbiville]: Here's a picture coming up of LZ Birmingham.
[Gary Banta]: That's LZ Birmingham.
[Gary Banta]: That's in the A Shau Valley.
[Gary Banta]: Most people think of Vietnam as a jungle, but in the A Shau Valley, it's mostly scrub type chenry.
[Gary Banta]: That's a lot deeper than it looks.
[Gary Banta]: I mean, if you're looking at it, it looks like that's not very deep, but that chenry is 12, 15 feet tall.
[Gary Banta]: So it's pretty thick, but not as lush and green as most people would think.
[Tom Turbiville]: And you mentioned the church, the Catholic Church.
[Gary Banta]: Yeah, that's the Catholic Church in Hue.
[Gary Banta]: I thought it was a remarkable building there in Hue.
[Gary Banta]: I don't know if that exists today or not, but it did then, and I thought it was remarkable.
[Tom Turbiville]: Fascinating pictures.
[Tom Turbiville]: You came back in April of 1969, rank of E4.
[Tom Turbiville]: Assigned to the commanding general's office, General John J. Sutherland, at Fort Knox, Kentucky, and you
[Tom Turbiville]: You pride yourself as being one of the few people that have seen the gold at Fort Knox, right?
[Gary Banta]: I don't know what percentage of Americans or how many, if you said one out of 10,000 or 100,000.
[Gary Banta]: But as a driver for a lieutenant general, which three-star general, when he went there, I, of course, had the opportunity to go in, too.
[Gary Banta]: So I've been in it twice.
[Gary Banta]: I've seen the gold.
[Gary Banta]: I don't know how much gold there now, but there was sure a lot of gold there in 1969.
[Tom Turbiville]: That was a fascinating tour.
[Tom Turbiville]: General Sutherland asked you where you wanted to go.
[Tom Turbiville]: You didn't want to go back to Vietnam.
[Tom Turbiville]: Spain was your first choice.
[Tom Turbiville]: He couldn't help you there, but he sent you to Holland.
[Tom Turbiville]: And then eventually, and the place you were in Holland was sort of a relay station type of thing for Vietnam, communication for Vietnam, right?
[Gary Banta]: Yeah, it was shortwave radio connection, and it was all, of course, encrypted.
[Gary Banta]: And I was assigned there, and there were 23 Americans at the Pine Concern in Maastricht in the Netherlands.
[Tom Turbiville]: Right.
[Tom Turbiville]: There for six months and then to a Baptist retreat in Mannheim, Germany, where you were a chaplain's assistant.
[Tom Turbiville]: Talk about that duty.
[Gary Banta]: Well, I had gone, we went and had a Baptist retreat at Berstischgarten, which is the Oberst Salzburg, Hitler's retreat.
[Gary Banta]: And we went to the Jenner Walker Hotel and Major Leroy A. Sisk, chaplain, was there and his chaplain's assistant was going home.
[Gary Banta]: And I just met him, and we talked.
[Gary Banta]: And he said, would you be interested in being a chaplain's assistant in Germany?
[Gary Banta]: And I told him I would.
[Gary Banta]: So I got orders and transferred from Maastricht in the Netherlands to Mannheim, Germany, and was a chaplain's assistant, which was probably the best duty that any soldier could ever have.
[Tom Turbiville]: Like you said, people didn't mess with the chaplain's assistant.
[Gary Banta]: No, they didn't.
[Tom Turbiville]: They did not.
[Tom Turbiville]: You helped soldiers along who had gotten Dear John letters and such like that.
[Tom Turbiville]: And it was a good humanitarian duty, which I know you liked very much.
[Tom Turbiville]: You got out of the Army in January of 1971.
[Tom Turbiville]: You had really sort of become the spiritual leader there.
[Tom Turbiville]: After the chaplain had gone home, you came back to Texas, to Stinnett, Texas in 1971, went back to school, a little bit of time at Texas Tech, then Howard Payne, got your teaching degree, taught for two years, but then you joined the telephone company.
[Gary Banta]: That's right.
[Tom Turbiville]: And you did that for 27 years.
[Gary Banta]: It was GTE and, of course, it was never, right?
[Tom Turbiville]: Right.
[Gary Banta]: But I worked with them and had a wonderful career, worked with a lot of great people with the phone company and had a lot of good friends and a lot of great memories of working with the phone company.
[Tom Turbiville]: I want to spend the time that we have left, about six and a half minutes or so here, talking about the American Legion because you are the proud commander of the American Legion, the Earl Graham Post 159.
[Tom Turbiville]: in Bryan that serves all of the Brazos Valley.
[Tom Turbiville]: Talk a little bit about the Legion and the good work that it does.
[Tom Turbiville]: I know one of the programs that you all are most proud of is Boys State and Girls State.
[Gary Banta]: Boys State and Girls State.
[Gary Banta]: Boys State and Girls State are magnificent programs of the American Legion.
[Gary Banta]: This gives students the ability to go and function as a government.
[Gary Banta]: go and actually run for office in a fictitious city, in a fictitious county of a fictitious state, and they run for a particular office.
[Gary Banta]: Now, when they all get there, they don't know what office they wanna run for, what office it would be, but everyone has the opportunity to run for and be elected.
[Gary Banta]: And this past year,
[Gary Banta]: Our two contestants from Bryan College Station, not only won Boys State, but they were sent to Nation, Boys Nation, in Washington, D.C.
[Tom Turbiville]: And they were the only ones from Texas that were sent.
[Gary Banta]: The only ones from Texas.
[Gary Banta]: Both from this post.
[Gary Banta]: Post 1596 District.
[Gary Banta]: And so we're pretty happy about that, the national representatives from the state of Texas.
[Tom Turbiville]: Indeed.
[Tom Turbiville]: I know you said that you got involved with the American Legion just about, guess what, in 2006 or 2007.
[Tom Turbiville]: One of the reasons you got involved with American Legion is you wanted to be a part of the Honor Guard.
[Tom Turbiville]: And this is something that American Legion does and serves for people who have passed, for veterans who have passed.
[Tom Turbiville]: Talk a little bit about the Honor Guard for people that don't know what it does.
[Gary Banta]: Well, the Honor Guard's what brought me to the American Legion.
[Gary Banta]: I believe that the service that, and I'm not speaking for myself, I'm speaking for
[Gary Banta]: the millions of others that have served.
[Gary Banta]: But when they leave this life, I believe it's altogether fitting and proper that we do military honors.
[Gary Banta]: And we do that regularly in the Brazos Valley.
[Gary Banta]: We do often two or three times a week.
[Gary Banta]: And it's just the process of the 21-gun salute taps and presenting that flag to the family.
[Tom Turbiville]: Right.
[Gary Banta]: And so that they can place that flag in a place of prominence in their home so that people that can come later and see that this is a home that was led by a person that served his nation.
[Gary Banta]: And that's what the American Legion is really all about is Americanism.
[Gary Banta]: We're political, but we're not partisan.
[Gary Banta]: But that's the thing about the American Legion that I'm most proud of is it's all about Americanism.
[Tom Turbiville]: One thing that i know that you want to do and is a concern is that uh you know none of us you i anybody we're not getting any younger our World War II veterans are in their 80s and 90s our Korean
War veterans are in their 70s and and the Vietnam War veterans are getting to 60 and and above and so getting younger veterans involved in American Legion is something that you're striving for and it's a it's a little bit of a challenge sometimes
[Gary Banta]: It is a challenge because of the generational difference between, say, the Vietnam veterans and Desert Storm.
[Gary Banta]: There's a long time in there.
[Gary Banta]: And we're going to have to adapt.
[Gary Banta]: The American Legion, VFW, I'm also a life member of the DAV.
[Gary Banta]: We're going to have to adapt to bring those veterans inside these organizations so that they can represent the future generations that come.
[Gary Banta]: I'd like to say that we won't be involved in war
[Gary Banta]: in the future.
[Gary Banta]: But that's not a fact of life.
[Tom Turbiville]: Right.
[Gary Banta]: Right.
[Tom Turbiville]: Exactly.
[Gary Banta]: Freedom's not free.
[Tom Turbiville]: And another thing that I know that you all do, and as the VFW and the DAV do, is you send packages overseas to Afghanistan monthly.
[Tom Turbiville]: Care packages or packages with anything that the soldiers need, right?
[Gary Banta]: Yeah, our second commander, Jerry Heights, second vice commander Jerry Heights, has faithfully been involved in sending packages overseas.
[Gary Banta]: We send packages over on a regular basis.
[Gary Banta]: And it's the kinds of things that soldiers need.
[Tom Turbiville]: Right.
[Gary Banta]: The comfort items that they don't have.
[Gary Banta]: You know, we got some of that in Vietnam, not very much, but I'm sure would have liked to have had it.
[Tom Turbiville]: Yes.
[Gary Banta]: Little things like moist towel.
[Gary Banta]: Somebody sent me some of those one time, and you can't imagine the comfort of washing your face off when you haven't washed your face in a week.
[Tom Turbiville]: Especially in the conditions like you were in, in Vietnam, which the men and women that are in Afghanistan and Iraq right now are in right now.
[Gary Banta]: So a little something special to eat.
[Gary Banta]: Just anything that they can use, we try to send.
[Tom Turbiville]: The Ergram Post, I know you all meet, what, the first Thursday of each month?
[Gary Banta]: First Thursday of each month.
[Gary Banta]: And if you're a veteran in the Brazos Valley,
[Gary Banta]: We'd love to have you come.
[Gary Banta]: We have a happy social hour that begins at 6 o'clock, and we eat at 7, and our regular meeting is at 8, but we'd love any veteran of Brazos Valley to come, no matter what generation.
[Tom Turbiville]: Yeah, a wonderful facility out there, and I know that you rent out the facility, too, at times.
[Tom Turbiville]: You have both indoor and a great outdoor patio with grills and cookouts and all of that, so it's a great facility that's
[Tom Turbiville]: over there in Bryan.
[Tom Turbiville]: And it's available to the public if they would like to rent it.
[Gary Banta]: Indeed.
[Tom Turbiville]: You and your wife, Debbie, are very active in your retirement.
[Tom Turbiville]: I know that I wish we had time to talk about the mission trips that you all have taken to Germany, but you remain active.
[Tom Turbiville]: But we're out of time, and I just want to thank you for your service, not only in Vietnam, but certainly now with being the commander of 159.
[Gary Banta]: Well, Tom, I want to thank you for what you do for the Veterans of Brazos Valley.
[Tom Turbiville]: It's always a pleasure.
[Gary Banta]: Thank you.
[Tom Turbiville]: Thank you, Gary.
[Tom Turbiville]: He served the country that he loved in Vietnam, and even though he left active service in 1971, Gary Banta continues to serve today in his retirement.
[Tom Turbiville]: He calls the American Legion, especially the Earl Graham Post 159, unique, and it is.
[Tom Turbiville]: We salute him for his brave service in Vietnam and his service today.
[Tom Turbiville]: I'm Tom Turbiville.
[Tom Turbiville]: Join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.
[Music.]